1. Find the titles of all movies directed by Steven Spielberg.

select title from movie where director = 'Steven Spielberg';

2. Find all years that have a movie that received a rating of 4 or 5, and sort them in increasing order.

select distinct m.year from movie m join rating r on m.mid=r.mid where r.stars in (4,5)
order by m.year asc;

3. Find the titles of all movies that have no ratings.

select title from movie where mid not in (select distinct mid from rating);

4. Some reviewers didn't provide a date with their rating. Find the names of all reviewers who have ratings with a NULL value for the date.

select re.name from reviewer re join rating r on re.rid = r.rid where r.ratingDate is null;

5. Write a query to return the ratings data in a more readable format: reviewer name, movie title, stars, and ratingDate. Also, sort the data, first by reviewer name, then by movie title, and lastly by number of stars.

select re.name,m.title, r.stars, r.ratingDate  from rating r join reviewer re on r.rid = re.rid join movie m on m.mid=r.mid
order by re.name, m.title, r.stars;

6. For all cases where the same reviewer rated the same movie twice and gave it a higher rating the second time, return the reviewer's name and the title of the movie.

select re.name, m.title from rating r1 join rating r2 on r1.rid = r2.rid join reviewer re on r2.rid = re.rid
join movie m on m.mid=r2.mid
where r1.mid = r2.mid and r1.ratingDate < r2.ratingDate and r1.stars < r2.stars;

7. For each movie that has at least one rating, find the highest number of stars that movie received. Return the movie title and number of stars. Sort by movie title.

select m.title, max(r.stars) from movie m join rating r on m.mid = r.mid
group by m.title
order by m.title;

8. For each movie, return the title and the 'rating spread', that is, the difference between highest and lowest ratings given to that movie. Sort by rating spread from highest to lowest, then by movie title.

select * from 
(select m.title, (max(r.stars) - min(r.stars)) as rating_spread from movie m join rating r on m.mid = r.mid
group by m.title) order by rating_spread desc, title;

9. Find the difference between the average rating of movies released before 1980 and the average rating of movies released after 1980. (Make sure to calculate the average rating for each movie, then the average of those averages for movies before 1980 and movies after. Don't just calculate the overall average rating before and after 1980.)

select avg(m1.rating_avg) - avg(m2.rating_avg) from 
(select m.mid, m.title, avg(r.stars) as rating_avg from movie m join rating r on m.mid = r.mid
where m.year < 1980 group by m.mid, m.title) m1,
(select m.mid, m.title, avg(r.stars) as rating_avg from movie m join rating r on m.mid = r.mid
where m.year > 1980 group by m.mid, m.title) m2;
